Beyond the blues scale

The blues scale is well documented and is a firm favourite with beginners because of /
it's satisfying character and relative ease of entry

But there's more to using the bluesscale than just being aware of these 6 notes /
and getting some context will put you in good sted for getting the most out of this /
powerful and apparently simple apparent scale

------

The first thing we learn about the blues scale is that it is simply a minor pentatonic /
with a flat 5 added called 'the blue note', and we see when we play that blue note that it /
does indeed add that feeling to the already minor pentatonic.

You might also figure out whilst playing this scale that this flat5 blue note sounds particularly /
bluesy when you scoop bend between it and the the 5th. You might also notice that something similar /
happens when you bend around your flat3.

This is no coincidence and speaks to an infrequently considered fact about the blues scale /
and that is that microtones, which are notes *between* what we normally call notes,
 are rife in the blues, particularly around not just the the flat5 but also the flat3 and the flat7.

It is common in the blues to talk about there being 3 blue notes, and we'll avoid getting too /
accademic here, but they are for very accademic reasons notes microtonally lower than the flat5 /
and the flat7 and commonly within a microtonal range around the flat3 up to a midway between either the /
2 or the 3. In the case of the flat7 it seems possible to consider something very slightly /
higher than the flat7 to be a blue note too.

So what does this mean for little old us on the harmonica. Do we care about this? Do we need to know it /
afterall we figured out that bending the flat 3 around sounds bluesy even though we didn't /
know that this was formally recognised by blues scholors. /

Well here's 3 reasons that this information should be enlightening:

1. The 5 hole draw has a microtonal bend in it which isn't depicted on harmonica layouts like the /
one we have here because it's not enough to qualify as a note in semitone based western notation /
which we're used to. This bend may or may not be enough to reach the most bluesy limit of this blue note /
but it certainly is somewhat bluesy and underconsidered for this purpose. Afterall, the flat7 is /
already a minor function scale degree and we often conflate minor and blues as being the same thing. /
Knowing this means you can avoid making that mistake and be more deliberate about this purpose of your bends there.

2. When you control a 4 draw bend to get a proper flat5, you are actually not taking the bend all the way /
to it's limit. There is a microtonal bend beyond the actual flat5 which similarly to the bend beyond the /
flat7 won't be as blue as you can get, but is certainly somewhat bluesy. But remember, if this sounds great /
when you are playing the blues, but a little flat when you're actually trying to hit a flat 5 then now you /
know why.

3. The flat3.. Well, like I say, it doesn't take much for us to realise that bending around wildly /
on the 3 hole can sometimes sounds great even without very much awareness about exactly /
where we are in the bend. /
Now let me be clear, it's bad to not be aware of what you're playing but it is revealing /
and here's what I think it's revealing of - before I continue I must confess that what comes next /
contains some personal speculation, but it's based on a semi-decent music education, some wikipedia research /
and the opinions of some of youtube's most loved harp players. Liam Ward I'm taking you down with me.

Before I make this point let me make another supporting point, which is this: the blues scale /
is not by itself the blues, and one of the reasons it's not is that one key aspect of /
the blues is the tension and release, the dissonance and resolution that comes *in part* from /
the combination of major and minor tones, meaning major and minor scales. There is a link in /
the description to a video by liam ward making this point very well with examples. This is all /
I can try and blame Mr Ward for in truth.

So let's get back to this point about the blue notes. Why is it worth understanding that the /
blue note around the flat3 has so much range? Well between the 3 and the flat3 is the transition /
between the major and minor pentatonic scales. And as we've just proposed, the blues sits in that /
gap between the minor and the major. Let's have a look at the minor and major pentatonics here. /
You can see that there is only one minor pentatonic note which has a major pentatonic neighbor /
on either side, and that's the flat3. Both sides of the flat3 lead directly towards a highly /
fundamental major tone, and it's this that I'm suggesting is the reason that we are so able to /
dig up bluesy sounds with 'off centre' bends either side of the flat3.

So now we know that to be our bluesiest we can conciously take advantage of the blury lines between /
major and minor which the blue notes can offer us, and conciously aim at the microtonal shifts /
which all but constitute the full range of blue notes available to us in second position.


A final point just to ram this home.

The blues scale doesn't have to be played in second position. You can see it's available in third position /
and while it can seem appealing to have this flat3 available without having to bend, we can see /
that we're going to lose a lot of our ability to ride those bluesy microtones. It has other advantages /
though...

It's also worth mentioning the advantages of other positions in this respect. Fifth position for example /
gives us the ability to bend the flat5 closer to the 4, which is the doctrine location of the blue note /
around here.

I have tried to avoid getting too accademic and I may have failed a few times, particularly /
since most of us still have a lot of work to do to really even be happy with the blues in second position, /
but I hope this has been an interesting expose of some of the frequently overlooked reaches /
beyond the blues scale as it will have initially come to you.

So in summary, remember that the blues is a conversation between the major and the minor, and /
remember that blue notes are a glimps of the two. The more you understand, the more you can /
achieve without just practicing more scales. But do practice your scales.
