The major pentatonic and why it works so well

Ever wonder why you can play the same major pentatonic riffs over all of the
chord changes in a 12 bar blues, and not have to worry about the new key
clashing with any of the notes? In this lesson we cover what the
major pentatonic is, and why it's such good value for money.

If you like what you see then you can pick up HarpGuru in the google play store, and possibly the apple app /
store depending on when you're watching this. If you have any questions at all then /
contact me in the comments below or on the developer email address in the description. /
Alright, let's get to it.

On the screen now we have the major pentatonic scale represented with it's scale degrees /
highlighted, where the 1 in green is the root note of the scale on the two hole draw,
which confirms that we are in second position.
This lesson has a bit of theory to it so to keep things simple we're going to start in C
which means we'll need an F harmonica.

A C major pentatonic in C is made up of C, D, E, G & A. Which is the same as the C major scale,
but with the F & the B, the 4th and the 7th removed.

If you need to review any of this then have a look at my previous video introducing the major pentatonic scale

So let's say we are playing a 12 bar blues in C. That means that the I chord is C, the IV chord is F and /
the V chord is G. You don't need to know that to follow this, but for those who are curious, it's possible /
to use this menu to understand what your root pitch will be when you play in first, second or third /
position, which is the same thing as knowing what your key you're in.

With the current display we can see that the scale degrees are represented on what HarpGuru calls the harpface /
with the associated notes represented on the left in this legend. Let's swap that round, we'll see why in a moment.
Now the pitches are on the harpface and the degrees are in the legend. We still have, /
C, D, E, G & A highlighted, and in the legend it is clear that these are made of the 1,2,3,5 & 6.

So we're trying to figure out what is so magical about these 5 notes which means that we can play them 
over all 3 of the chords in the 12 bar progression. Well lets see what happens when we play these notes
in 1st position, the 4 chord.

The first thing to point out is that we still have C, D, E, G & A highlighted, but the G on the 2 hole draw
isn't the root note anymore, now it's the 5th which we can see from it's associated colour in the left
hand legend

The next thing to point out is that with these 5 notes in first position, we are *not* playing our root note
which would be the F we remove at the beginning to make it a C pentatonic scale.
You'd think that would be a bit of a problem, but let's continue.

Let's look at which scale degrees we actually do have. 2nd, 3rd, 5th and 6th are part of the major
pentatonic anyway, they have each swapped which of our notes they are represented by, but it makes sense that they still sound
good since they all still fulfill a function in the F major pentatonic scale over the IV chord
as well as the C major pentatonic over the I chord

Except that is for the the E which is now fulfilling the role of a 7th in the F scale.
The 7th isn't part of the pentatonic so why would this work.

Well consider that the 7th is a legitimate part of the full major scale, which ultimately is
the complete foundation of the key that the chord is representing.
With that in mind it makes sense that it should work over this F major chord.

Let's move on to 3rd position. This time we do have our root which is satisfied by the G note, and looking
on the left we can see that we no longer have the 7th and we're also now missing  the 3rd,
and instead we have our 4th which is C.

Again, the 4th is not part of the major pentatonic, but it is part of the major scale.

So I think we have our answer! An answer anyway. Every note of a given key's major scale will fit over that key's major chord,
naturally, and the major pentatonic in a given key has the interesting property of only containing notes of the major scale
for the keys 1 position north and south of that key.

If you have time to look at the circle of fifths you'll see that the pitches which constitute a scale changes by
one as you move each position round the circle. This is one of the reason what we're seeing here happens, and
what that also means is that this is true regardless of what position you start from.

Let's setup our major pentatonic in another position, say, ninth, which as you can see is awful,
but luckily I'm not going to have to play this to make the point.

The point is that if we move from ninth being the I chord, to eigth being the IV chord, we lose the
root and gain the 7th just like we did going to first position. And if we go up to tenth position
for the V chord, we replace the 7th with the root again and lose the 3rd in exchange for the 4th just like when
we moved up to 3rd before.

One final point to make is that all of this breaks down as soon as we go one position further in either direction
Let's demonstrate back in 1st, 2nd, and 3rd though to leave this madness as quickly as possible
So moving past the third to the 4th we get the flat 7, and moving past first to twelfth we get a flat 5, neither
of which are part of the major scale. This doesn't mean that they won't sound good, but if they do, it will
not be for the reason we've been discussing here.

You can see that if we go one position further in either direction this breaks down.

And all of this is true from any position.

Let's demonstrate doing the wholly insane thing 
if we set up a major pentatonic in another position, let's say 9th which would be a completely unreasonable
thing to do normally, we can move down to 8th and see the root removed
and the 7th take it's place, and *up* to 10th and see the 3rd removed and the 4th take it's place.

So is the major pentatonic magic? Well, no. But it is beautiful isn't it.

To summarise: We've found one good reason why the major pentatonic of the I chord
works so well over the IV and the V chord too, because all 5 of those notes are legit members of
all of those 3 keys major scales.

But whats the lesson? Well the truth is that everything we learn about relationships in music are guidelines.
The key is identifying what they are guidelines for. Well the pentatonic is clearly a guideline for stability.
We can use it to build themes which will sound great no matter which part of the 12 bar progression we're in.

Now that we know that, and knowing what we know from all the great lessons by teachers like Ronnie Shellist
who's always telling us to learn how to sit in the pocket, build themes through repetition and concepts like
what we've touched on today, and then mix it up with deviations from this theme and stability, now that we
know better where that stability comes from, we're in a much better position to put all of that
advice in to action.

We'll be going over some ideas for what that looks like in later videos. Knowledge dump over. I hope
that was interesting and understandable. If you've got it then let's build on it, if you didn't
then watch it again! You'll get it. But please do get in touch, we can lay some more foundations if needed.

Don't forget to like and subscribe, it really helps me out, and download HarpGuru! Get in there now before
it's cool! And let me know if you have any specific lesson requests. I'll be happy to help.

See you in the next video.




are in a much better position to get what we want out of it and know what to expect
when we deviate from it - spice! We'll be doing other videos exploring what happens when you deviate from
stability, but 

But music isn't all about stability, so how about we learn how to deviate from this foundation, and what it means
to do so. Well for one, we've seen that the root note of the IV chord (F in our case) is a fairly safe deviation.
It's not part of the I chord pentatonic, but it is still part of the I chord major scale. And what happens when it's
played over the V chord? Well it's functioning as a flat7. Now that's *not* part of the major scale, but that F
will have a lot of context from the I & IV chords to count on and the flat7 *is* the key component in the
mixolydian scale so here it could probably add a little bit of spice.

Then you can look at other deviations and conclude that they are VERY spicy and should be used with care

We now know that we can play all of these notes with confidence, but we have also realised that if we only
play these notes we'll be missing our root note on the 4 chord and our 3rd on the V chord. And just knowing
that that is what is going on should be enough to encourage us to experiment with including those notes to
push ourselves further.

So why not try this out. Try building some themes with the major pentatonic, because themes are good and
using the pentatonic you know you can repeat your theme with confidence. But them why not stay concious
of the notes which are missing from those 5 notes from this given chord and add them in for colour.

Thinking this way will give you a great platform for producing both structure and veriety, and with
HarpGuru you'll never be lost for answering the question

Now in all likelyhood, the version of this scale which you are going to play the most is in second /
position and during a major 12 bar blues progression you will be able to play the scale with confidence /

that none of the notes will sound bad at any point, just using second position. To understand why this /
is let's look a little deeper.

So we're trying to understand why it's possible to play these 5 notes over the entire 12 bar blues progression /
even though we are changing key from C to F and G. Well here's why, let's start by seeing what happens when we /
go to the IV chord which means we are really in first position, even though we're just playing all the same /
notes. You can see, all of the notes are now different colours. That's because they now fulfill different /
roles in the key that the progression is now in. The IV chord is F, which is on the 1 hole blow, but /
F isn't part of our major pentatonic in C, so we're not playing it here. Since we're not playing the root /
note, but we are still playing 5 notes, another scale degree must be being played now, and yes, we can /
see that we are now playing the 4. Now the 4 is not
