The major pentatonic is the foundation of so much of what you will be playing /
on harmonica that it makes sense that it's one of the first scales that most /
people learn.

In this lesson we'll be using HarpGuru to give you a visual representation of how to play this scale /
and in later videos we'll be using it again to explore the scale in much more detail so we can /
get the most out of it.

With that said, let's crack on.

Here we have the pentatonic scale, highlighted in HarpGuru
and to play it in sequence we just have to play the highlighted numbers in sequence.
1 is the root note in green which is at the 2 hole draw, confirming that this is second position
using a C harmonica that means we will be playing in the key of G, meaning this is a G major pentatonic scale

So let's play these notes sequentially.

1 on the 2 hole draw
2 on the 3 hole full step bend
3 on the 3 hole draw
5 on the 4 hole draw
6 on the 5 hole blow
and back to 1 but an octave higher on the 6 hole blow.

So far so good, now if this looks familiar then you might be interested to learn that if we add in the /
4th and the 7th then this is actually a regular old major scale. That's no coincidence, the /
major pentatonic is a refinement of the major scale.
You will probably be more familiar with the major scale in first position, so let's /
quickly change to first position to take a look
and to keep things sounding the same for comparison, we will /
continue playing in the key of G which in first position requires a G harmonica, which I have right here.

Now just to ram home the point that the major pentatonic is a refinement of the major scale, lets remove /
the 4th and the 7th and play the G major pentatonic now in first position.
Now to make this point stick, because the major pentatonic is a refinement of the major scale, we can also /
play the major pentatonic in first position by once again removing the 4th and the 7th.
Because we can play the G major scale in first position, we can obviously also play the G major pentatonic /
scale since it only involves removing the 4th and the 7th note. The major pentatonic in first position is /
simple, but it's not taught to beginners as early as second position. If you want to know why, then /
stick around for subsequent videos. For now let's get back to second position.

Now, eagle eyed viewers might have noticed that if you add in the 4th and the 7th then this /
becomes a regular old G major scale.

But it is useful for showing the major pentatonic's origin, and for understanding some of it's behaviours which /
we'll conver in later vidos.

Switching back to second position we need to switch back to our C harmonica and you can see that /
we are still playing in G and our major pentatonic scale is still highlighted.

We've seen how to play the major pentatonic in this lower register, but it's worth pointing /
out that the same scale is fully available in the middle register between holes 6 and 9 aswell /
and also partially available between holes 9 & 10 as well as 1 & 2.

You can practice each of these registers individually or work them all together. Both of /
these exercises are worth doing, and with HarpGuru you can really build a good visual /
model of the breathing patterns required to play these notes when you're away from the app.

As is usual with diatonic harmonica, the patterns are completely irregular, but HarpGuru /
gives you a visual model which is easy to read and internalise so you can recall these patterns /
when you are away from the app.

That's the basic introduction to the major pentatonic scale. In subsequent videos we'll /
be looking at what makes this scale so versitile and in particular how it is best /
used for the purposes of blue blue blues.

Please like and subscribe to make sure you don't miss any of these lessons, and if you /
like the look of HarpGuru then please do consider downloading it from the Android play store /
or if you have any questions, requests or anything else that belongs in the comments then /
you know what to do.

See you in the next video.
