In a previous video we looked at the basics of the major pentatonic
scale as a foundation to a whole load of the music you'll be playing 
on the harmonica. Well following up close behind like a ....
is the minor pentatonic.

In this video we'll take a look at the minor pentatonic from a few
angles, visualising at every step using harp guru to try and get
a firm grounding on this scale, where it comes from and what options
it leaves open to us.

We'll demonstrate in second position initially to keep it familar.
You might recognise this already, in the lower register anyway.
Let's review for those at the back.

I sometimes feel like the major and minor pentatonics are not that
dissimilar, which seems extremely wrong when you consider that it
requires 3 straight swaps to move from the major to the minor leaving
only the Root note and the Fifth in place. I've got some ideas about
why they feel so related which we'll touch on here and come on to in
later videos.

You'll recall from our major pentatonic video that we arrive at the
5 particular notes of the scale as a refinement of the 7 note major
scale. Well the same is true for the minor pentatonic too.

It's most often identified that the minor pentatonic is a refinement
of the natural minor otherwise known as the aeolian scale. To get this
scale from the minor pentatonic we add in the 2 and the b6, and it sounds
like this.

That's the natural minor or aeolian scale. It's also possible to end up
with the exact same pentatonic from the Dorian scale which is the exact
same as the Aeolian, except the b6 is replaced with a 6, and it sounds
like this. You can see that this scale is a bit easier to play in second
position, but that's not the point is it.

Finally, just for completeness, let's just return to aeolian and see
that you can also refine the minor pentatonic from one more scale,
which we get to by replacing the 2 with a b2. This is called the
phrygian scale and it sounds like this.

So what's the point? Well consider that we've got 3 scales here with
pretty different sounds which are *perfectly* hospitable to the very
same minor pentatonic. So you've got great value for money here, and
great security too. If you hear a minor context, you *know* the minor
pentatonic is going to work just fine. (check whether there is another minor scale which isn't covered by it)




Show that it's a refinement from the natural minor which is actually
a very difficult scale to play in second position, so it might be
surprising that it's such a popular context to refine a pentatonic
from. There are reasons that we might overlook this problem so
frequently, but we'll get to that in later video's. 

Show that the scale is even easier to play on a natural minor harp
because the natural minor harp, of course is configured to play
the natural minor scale.

Show relative minor and major

Show that the minor pentatonic can be a refinement of several
different minor scales

Minor pentatonic - 1, b3, 4, 5, b7

3th: Dorian - 1, 2, b3, 4, 5, 6, b7

4th: Natural minor is the same as Aeolian mode - 1, 2, b3, 4, 5, b6, b7

5th: Phygian mode - 1, b2, b3, 4, 5, b6, b7


